and give some sense of the literature, the tremendous literature, both book cultural literature, the history of book cultural literature, and also the enumerative bibliography, which is a separate issue that has been written in a variety of languages about
books, bookmen, libraries in that part of the world.
And then maybe thirdly, to give some sense of how after 1989, this world
that had existed for 70 some odd years in Russia and former Soviet Union and for a shorter time in Eastern Europe, kind of socialist or communist dominated world, how this came apart and what the influence or the impact was of this on book culture, on literate culture, on scholarship,
It's a very dramatic story.
And how all of these lives, thousands of people, tens of thousands,
librarians, bibliographers, writers, how their lives have really been completely, you know, it's as if, you know, you're standing on a... Completely devolved, completely destroyed, after investing, you know, 40 or 50 years in a discipline.
and then to see that whole world in which you were a functioning part completely unraveled.
For example, Zeit said... Then you said, it's almost as if... It's almost as if you had been standing on some pedestal or on some mount, and someone comes along and rudely kicks the pedestal, and you fall, and everything that
that you're holding these precious cultures off somehow just, you know, devolves.
It's a very, I've seen so many lives, colleagues of mine.
For example, you have, you know, someone like Professor Fadier of Moscow University here.
Let's see where I can quickly get one of her.
I think I'm on track here.
This is very good.
The context here, I see it very good.
But in any case, some of these books are double stuck.
But here is a woman who has spent a significant portion of her life studying the book, the manuscript and printed book,
And she was getting government subsidies to do her various travels and so on.
Has a doctorate in the field.
Is considered one of the world's premier specialists in 17th century Russian book culture.
And now, given other economic interests and other forces,
that are going on in that part of the world, she's become completely marginalized.
So you could have a stack of books this high, and all of a sudden, you're nothing.
Your salary has disappeared.
You have no savings, because most Eastern European people, they have no savings.
They don't have, you know, sumptuous apartments, they don't have, you know, antiques.
So, for example, Padyeva has
You know, 35,000 books in her private library.
35,000.
You can't even look into her apartment because everybody... She's a professor at Moscow University.
She was a consultant to New York Public Library.
What's her name again?
You have to meet her at some point.
P-O-Z-D-E-E-V-A.
And what's her first name?
Irina.
I-I-N-A.
Right.
And here is a woman who... She's in Moscow now?
In Moscow, at Moscow University.
We're in the center of town.
And desperately needs Western support, Western financial, that's what, to keep, to keep going.
And so for a second time in this century, first time after the Revolution, where you have this tremendous absolute realignment, I wrote an article called The Old Cadres in Service of the Revolution, where incunabulus, like Malaya, were great professors before the Revolution,
after the revolution, his German, Latin, his tremendous erudition, Greek, and so on.
We don't need this stuff.
We need people who are going to work in the factories.
The hell with your Greek and Latin.
You're going into the library.
You're no longer going to be exposed to students because we don't trust you politically.
You're going to catalog books.
Is that what they did to have?
Exactly.
You have this?
Of course.
This is one of the essays?
One of the essays.
I'll give you that, too.
But my point is,
that here again, second time in this century, that you have this very abrupt change of values in the society, where erudition, book learning, book culture, now is the emphasis, do you know English?
If you know English, you're going to work in a bank, you're going to be a typist, you're going to be a computer processor,
And the hell with all of this stuff?
Okay, so who is this fellow now that they threw him into the law?
Malayan, the great professor before.
How do you spell his name?
M-A-L-E-I-N.
And then in the 30s, when he was working on the gazelle.
Let me just jump back here.
Now, this guy clearly pissed some people off, because you're telling me about some other people, and they didn't make any waves, and they were allowed to keep their libraries and their collections.
So why did this guy all of a sudden
with his great audition and his great scholarship, why did they single him out and say, we don't need you?
I think that they did not, many intellectuals who did, they did not trust politically, because they may have come from a religious background, they may have, as I said, their parents may have been religious.
You see what I'm saying?
He's clearly one that wasn't protected in the manner in which you described earlier.
Let me say,
We're talking about the period just after the revolution, where people are very concerned about issues of political reliability, about political security of the regime.
And they did not want a person who was educated in the ethos of the old regime in front of students.
That was the point.
I mean, Stalin sent a lot of his intellectuals off to the gulags, and they were just plain killed.
Right.
But some people were used because they had specialized... Now, for example... They were useful in some fashion.
Useful in some fashion, and if you're in a library, if you're cataloging something, if you're working on Incunabula that is contributing to the Soviet
contribution to the Gesamtkatalog, the Wiede Lücke in Germany, but then when the Nazis came to power, people who knew German were also suspected.
They said, well, what are you, are you writing to people in Berlin?
What are you writing to them?
And he's sending them bibliographical information, and they say, well, maybe you're a Nazi.
Maybe you're an enemy of the state.
Is it in your essay?
I'm sure it's there, which I will give you,
But my point is that here again a second time in the century, you have people, and people that you can admire, that I can admire, whose lives have been profoundly, profoundly shaken up.
I mean, think of our friend Zaitsev.
How humiliating it must have been.
I mean, he wouldn't say this, but just think about it.
Here is a man who was
responsible for... I think he was head of the cultural section of the Communist Party apparatus in St.
Petersburg.
Then he became a library director of one of the major libraries in the world.
During the Soviet period.
And now,
He's coming to New York, and sitting at a table, he doesn't have any Western language, right?
No, right?
So he has to, you know, rely on an interpreter, but he has to rely on an interpreter in even a deeper level of trying to understand who are these people,
Why are they here?
Who is Baz Baines?
Why is he here?
Well, he doesn't even have a cool as to what I think.
Right.
And how does he figure into, and who is this lady who has given, you know, X number of millions of dollars?
And how is it that all of this comes together, and how does this work?
And how can I, and what can I do to get it worked for me?
That's the question.
This is really what he's trying to figure out.
What is?
Because the rules have changed dramatically.
And not only, how does it, but I must get this to work for me.
But being a survivor, he's probably sure that he's going to do it.
He's got a good chance of doing it as anyone.
As anyone.
Is he an intellectual, fundamentally, or is he basically a party guy that is, you know?
I think he has some background in the...
But this is basically where he's wound up in the shake-up, I guess.
In the shake-up.
Actually, he was there before the profound shake-up and was able to hold on.
But he could just as easily have been working in banking or commerce or something like that.
Yeah, yeah, sure.
And he's not like yourself, a book professional.
Yeah.
You know what I'm saying?
His background is not in the world of letters.
Right.
He could have gone into some other
into some other discipline, but... He's not a librarian.
He's not a... Far from it.
And he's not even like Paul.
I mean, he's not a librarian, but he's... He was not even an academic physician.
He was a cultural administrator within the party structure of the city.
And here again, if you... Let me just get something from my throat before it devolves further.
So you have a little call, too, I feel better.
Yeah.
Because I was afraid to come down today and it was my own call.
In fact, I have one little throat thing left, but I'm going to take the bite.
Yeah, please.
This happened, actually, it came on, I think, yesterday or so.
It comes in a little fast.
Excuse me, one second.
Would you like more coffee?
I'm also fine.
In fact, in another 15 minutes, I'm going to take a break.
Clear up.
I thought we might want to...
or how you might want to proceed.
I think that probably the story, if you will, that you want to tell is about this
the vast academic structure, library structure, bibliophilic, book culture, that was created and pumped up in the 20th century
actually throughout communist or socialist dominated lands.
Including what you alluded to, namely Sarajevo.
That's perfect to see.
Part of that.
This vast structure that with minor variance existed in socialist countries
from Khabarovsk on the Pacific to the borders of Germany.
What was the name of that place?
Khabarovsk, the great port on the Pacific, Soviet port on the Pacific.
K-H-A-B-A-R-O-V-O-S-K.
Khabarovsk.
This vast enterprise, cultural enterprise, which included
libraries, and museums, and curators, and archives, and manuscripts, and bibliophiles, and publishers, and book designers, and, you know, that whole group of people who work with some part of book culture, and how buttressing this book culture
Worst states, Poland, Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, Latvia, Lithuania, for example, just looking at this, another example.
Here's a catalog of Estonian book design.
Also part of that, showing what the kinds of things that they
covers and book designs.
And part also of the story is how this book culture continued to get infusions during the period after World War II with the trophy collections, things that were
captured archival manuscript documents, books from countries that the Nazis had occupied, and from the Nazis themselves, and taken to Russia.
And how supporting this also was a vast publishing industry, a kind of industry
In all of these areas, I mean, look at the, just even in a small private collection like this, how many books you have dealing with all aspects of book culture, listings of books, histories of bibliophiles, history of readers, history of libraries, this literature buttressing that book culture, and then how, beginning in the late 80s,
As the values of these societies, or as these societies became open societies, transparent societies, because of the kind of telecommunication revolution, where people began to see themselves no longer in a kind of obfuscated way,
in an obfuscated mirror, but could see themselves a little more in context, where people, library directors would come, and museum directors, who thought that they were just presiding over the greatest thing ever, and they would come and look at automation, or look at curatorial techniques in the West, or would look at the Metropolitan,
after being director of the Hermitage, he said, hey, what I've been doing is wrong, is incorrect, is inherently archaic.
And all of a sudden, the realization that the societies which they had been a part of, or that were a part of, were societies without an infrastructure, that many things that are taken for granted here
in the West, in Scandinavia, that these things could not be taken for granted, that there was something fundamentally wrong.
Then comes political revolution and economic revolution in these countries, where this whole segment of society, the curators, the writers, the bibliographers, are not
off the pedestals on which they had stood, and find themselves either leaving the country, the greatest bookman.
For example, the head of the rare book division in Zaitsev's library, Dr. Funken.
He now lives in Brooklyn, Massachusetts.
Exactly.
He's one of the greatest special, fantastic languages, specialist on the bookstore.
So what's he doing here?
He's living with a child, I think.
He left.
What's his name?
Garfunkel, G-O-R-F-U-N-K-E-L.
That's why there's about 20 miles from around there.
Yeah, you would have to meet him.
He's here.
Alexander.
And he was in charge of rare books?
Rare books in Zeitz's library.
In St.
Peter's library.
And is he working in books here?
I wrote a supporting letter for him to get a fellowship at the Russian Research Center at Harvard.
Is that where he is now?
Yeah, he's a fellow at Harvard.
Actually, yes, he must be on the phone over there.
I can get to it.
Gore Funko.
G-O-R-F-U-N-K-E-L.
You'll find him just charming.
He's like a little imp.
And he would be able to talk about these similar things?
Yeah.
One further prism for you, another personality.
I love it.
Also, this thing, I'm quite awake.
See?
So, just finishing this, and then...
I want to embellish on a couple, but you have people who leave the country, Yevtushenko living a block from yours truly.
Do you know him?
I see him in the stores.
Is he accessible?
I don't think he's ever been an easy man.
He's evidently a brilliant teacher.
And teachers, he has a university meaning that you're paying some exorbitant.
Not exorbitant, large-style.
Wonderful.
Like John Silber hiring Nobel Laureates at BNU.
We know what they pay him.
Right.
So Yevtushchenko's in the department there at Queens College, and lives right here.
And I see him on the street at his shop or something.
He has an office there at the university.
Yeah, I'll get you his home.
That's not a problem.
But he's very typical.
Imagine, he was a member of that very top belief, and he's now living in Forestville, and even in the déclasse part of Forestville.
So... Did he bring his books with them there one day?
I don't know.
I mean, did he leave Russia?
Or is this kind of a temporary gig for him?
He probably has an apartment still somewhere, or a dacha, or a home in Russia.
Many people, now, when you ask a person where they live from Eastern Europe, I mean, it's a very difficult question to ask.
We live here, part of the year there.
It's like trying to find a homeland for Yiddish, in a way.
Where is it?
Nobody knows.
So, excuse me one second.
And then I want to take a very brief walk, because at 1.45, I want to go...
My doctor is right over here.
No, I think that's probably enough for a session, too, because I'm driving back, too, so... Okay, but... We're back on it.
What I could envision is a series of, and it depends on your power of writing, a series of...
cameos in a series of word pictures on some of these people who, from different sectors, it could be a major publisher.
It could be a very major library director.
It could be a very major bibliographer, scholar, curator.
It could be a major museum director, because in my perception, books, manuscripts, and stuff, and museums, it's that whole world that I'm talking about.
And I treat them very similarly in this book.
It's about books, but I write about manuscripts, and I'm interested in the whole art thing.
It's cultural treasure is what we're talking about.
Exactly.
And then can we just go into the other one because I just want to show you so that you see a slightly different... Did you finish your summary, by the way?
To have a series of word pictures or cameos as to how in this vast area the lives of people and of whole parts of the society the book curatorial
cultural part of the society.
I'm not talking so much now about dance or theater or that kind of thing.
It's a little outside of my cat.
But the whole kind of cultural curatorial world has been the rules of the game for them have been changed in mid-course.
And their lives are becoming increasingly precarious.
increasingly unstable.
This is of the professionals.
The professionals, but also the bibliophiles, the collectors.
But how about the fate of the book itself?
Is it uncertain?
Is it threatened?
Is Sarajevo a metaphor for anything in your view?
I think that it is a metaphor, maybe,
may be a little too grandiose, but what has happened is that rules now are not governed by, or the book world is not governed by subsidy.
It is governed by very straightforward economic rules, whereas that was not the case.
before 89, you could publish a book, Czech Illuminated Manuscript 13, and the book cost 220 Czech crowns.
Now there are 30 crowns to the dollar.
So this book costs $6.
Six dollars.
For what looks like a $75 book.
Or $100 book.
This book was published... 1990.
Just on the cost.
Try and do it today.
Because the guy, if he's still alive, is no longer getting his salary in a regular way.
He's impoverished.
And the institution is also impoverished.
and the publishing house that did it is also.
So how, you know, when you say, is the book going to survive?
Yes, certain kinds of books are.
But they're going to be business directories.
They're going to be banking directories.
When we talk about books and libraries of the future, there are two totally different contexts for that.
We're talking in the Western sense, and I guess you're talking about just having them come up to something approaching where we are now.
Yeah, exactly.
That is another thing.
What you're doing, I think, is the following.
This book covers one part of universal reality, but only one part.
I call what I'm doing now a companion and not a sequel to this.
I really think that this is elementary school.
This is just collecting.
Right.
But now I'm trying to erase the whole concept of book culture, people, you know, where it goes.
But you're also taking here a different part of the world where, in our society, technological innovation, some economic change, changes and mores of the society,
have influenced the shape of book culture to come.
There, what you had is someone coming and kind of erasing what existed before.
And really, now when you go,
into a bookstore, let's say, in Eastern Europe, you either see complete impoverishment, in other words, there's nothing there, or you go and you see Western books, Jackie Steele, or translations of occult literature, or sex manuals, or business directories.
In other words, this kind of thing,
has receded and become very, very, very marginal.
I'm talking about these kinds of books.
Books about books, book culture, art books, things that are elements of already a society
that is supported in some way, that has an infrastructure.
Over here in the West, in the United States in particular, we talk about dumbing down our culture, and what you're suggesting is that there's a certain degree of dumbing down going on over there as well.
A dumbing down, but also almost a lobotomy, again, as after the revolution, taking place where a certain thing is just pulled out, extricated,
And other values are coming to the fore.
People now... Right.
The number of books thefts in Russia, historical library, the Moscow State University library, the Zaito's own library, major thefts.
By whom?
By insiders in some cases.
Selling over here, do you think?
Selling in various parts of the world.
Hebrew manuscripts are the most precious kind, etc., etc.
What I'm saying is that the book now is no longer to be read, interpreted, it's to be stolen.
It's to be an object of economic interest.
Something to be sold on the book, on the black market.
Exactly.
It's a commodity.
Right.
Okay.
Now, can we look at the other room?
And then what I, what time is it now?
It's 1, I think we're 12.20.
Right.
Then what I'd like to do is to take about a half... Start it again.
The destruction in other parts of Eastern Europe has not been physical in the way it's been in parts of the Caucasus or in Serbia, but morally and psychologically.
the destruction has been just as devastating on the lives of people who have spent the better part of their lives working in the area of book culture, and now, for a variety of reasons, no longer being able to pursue this course here.
Okay, go ahead.
You come down this street, and... Another element of this... Could you just give me an idea of what you mean by the destruction, though not physical?
In what sense?
Moral.
How, how, how, how is it?
For example, where a person who was a valued and honored member of society, reasonably well paid,
let's say a curator, now gets no money for months on end, because the military is more of a priority than the people who work in museums, in libraries, and territories, they're not going to go to the barricades in the last part.
But the military are armed, and if they're not paid, you have a major,
major emblem.
And so these people are eking out an existence while presiding over materials that are of international significance, like the curators of the Hermitage.
You're sitting next
to the greatest collections of impressionist art and you yourself are not paid it's like being a servant at a banquet where you're left performing a function but not being part any longer of that and not even being allowed to eat in the kitchen for that matter exactly because there's nothing
to eat except for the people who economically control the society.
Now, you can see very vividly here.
The next question, I suppose, is trying to get what we needed.
Let's develop a short list of people.
And also a subsidy for your work.
Are you interested in getting additional... These cultures have been living in a bifurcated environment.
Most of the 20th century.
Right.
You had a culture that was developing over there.
You had a culture in emigration.
And the two...
had not really come together until the decline of the socialist regimes.
So whatever was going on in the book world, in immigration, was very little known to people over there.
So you had collections developing, like the one in Putnam,
which were a counterweight to what these people... In Putnam, Connecticut?
Yeah.
It's a Lithuanian, that's where I went.
It's a Lithuanian immigrant library.
And it's in Putnam, Connecticut.
Is that something I should see?
It's all interesting as a kind of, we're getting wet again.
All right.
And you have these emigres trying to gather books and materials that are going to give the lie to the governments over there.
Well, I like that.
I like that.
This is also unusual.
I don't know of another example
where there were so many, like space, black, being developed, because all of these people who are afraid of themselves, they all had them, because they were desperately afraid that their countries were being distorted over there.
And in fact, they were.
And that they, here in the West, the emigrant libraries and archives and museums were bastions of truth.
It's not the same with the Greek emigration, is it?
No.
Because there was also always a movement back and forth.
So,
This adds a particular kind of buoyancy to these people's fate in the 20s.
Not only were they hermetically sealed within those societies, but there was no way of even their co-nationals communicating
communicating with them.
It was not only from the world at Orange that they were isolated, but most especially from their co-nationalists who were living out their lives and existence here in counterweight to what was going on there.
For example, here in New York, there are probably two very major Ukrainian libraries that were formed just as a kind of counterweight to what they saw
Formed here?
Since when?
Since the post-war period.
Where are they?
There's one on 100th Street, former Carnegie Library, there's another one on Lower... Under whose auspices?
Shochenko Scientific Society, Ukrainian Free Academy of Sciences, and so on.
So they're institutions?
They're institutional libraries?
Sure, they publish and so on.
And almost all of the ethnic groups have.
The Russians, the Estonians, the Lithuanians, the Blackians.
Emigre libraries.
How did they get the stuff over here?
Did they have to sneak it out?
Some was collected here.
There were bibliophiles in immigration.
They gathered materials in Germany and South America, and so on and so forth.
It's a whole museum in San Francisco.
It's a great organization.
And now the people from over there are coming here trying to convince them to give this material back to them.
I love that stuff.
That's another interesting nuance.
That's kind of what you were saying the other day in your library.
There were people there from Russia studying their own history because the materials are here and not there.
They're there every day.
I just had an artist.
who's doing the designs, the exceses, the frescoes, the great Cathedral of Christ the Savior in Moscow.
We came here to look at our photographs of the cathedral that were done in the 19th century because they're very vivid depictions of what it looked like before it was destroyed in the 20s.
It's a different, very different world than the one
When I walk into the reading room on a particular day, you have to kind of focus as to where you are.
Did I see this person, or am I in St.
Petersburg, Moscow, Warsaw, you know, Oakland?
Or am I in New York?
Because you see these people on a kind of... You're no longer localizing them because they're all over.
And why are they here?
To study.
to advertise their things.
There was an exhibit that just recently opened on Celebrating St.
Petersburg, so we had sites of this here actually for that purpose.
A very curious world.
The International Research and Exchanges Board has a whole series of fellowships, travel support that they give Greece to Europe, particularly Russia.
That would be probably
Pontifical Medieval Institute in Toronto on a campus.